.. _I.1:

1. Objective
------------

The objective of this book is to present the best known methods for practicing
piano. For students, knowing these methods means a reduction in learning time
that is a significant fraction of a lifetime and an increase in the time
available for making music instead of struggling with technique. Many students
spend 100% of their time learning new compositions and, because this process
takes so long, there is no time left to practice the art of making music. This
sorry state is the greatest hindrance to acquiring technique because making
music is necessary for technical development. The goal here is to make the
learning process so fast that we aim to allocate 10% of practice time to
technical work and 90% to making music.

How do musicians “make music”? Whether we compose music or play an instrument,
all music must originate in the artist’s brain. We can certainly shut our brains
off and play the piano from rote memory after enough practice. That is
absolutely the wrong way to make music because the level of the resulting music
will be low. Many pianists have the misconception that the expensive, huge,
concert grand produces its own sound with its characteristic music and therefore
we must train our fingers for learning to play the piano. But the human brain is
far more complex than, and superior to, any mechanical contraption in terms of
musicality. The brain doesn’t have the limitations of wood, felt, and metal.
Therefore, it is more important to train the brain than the finger muscles,
especially because any finger movement must originate as a nerve impulse in the
brain. The answer to the above question is what we shall call *Mental Play (MP)*
in this book. MP is simply the process of imagining the music in your mind, or
even actually playing it on an imaginary piano. We shall see that MP controls
practically everything we do in music, from the learning process (technique) to
memorization, absolute pitch, performance, composition, music theory,
interpretation, controlling nervousness, etc. It is so all-encompassing that it
is not possible to devote one section to explaining it; rather, it is discussed
in practically every section of this book. A fairly extended discussion is given
in :ref:`III.6.j`.

MP is what made Mozart (and all great musicians) what he was; he is considered
to be one of the greatest geniuses partly because of his MP abilities. The
wonderful news is that it can be learned. The sad historical fact is that too
many students were never taught MP; in fact, this book may be the first place
where MP has been given an official name (definition) although, if you are a
“talented” musician, you somehow had to magically pick it up yourself. Mental
Play should be taught from the first year of piano lessons and is especially
effective for the youngest youngsters; the most obvious way to start teaching it
is to teach memorization skills and absolute pitch. MP is the art of controlling
the minds of the audience through the music you play and therefore it works best
when it originates in your mind. The audience views your MP ability as something
extraordinary, belonging only to a select few gifted musicians with intelligence
far above the average person. Mozart was almost certainly aware of this and used
MP to greatly enhance his image. MP also helps you to learn piano in a myriad of
ways, as demonstrated throughout this book. For example, because you can conduct
MP away from the piano, you can effectively double or triple your practice time
by using MP when a piano is not available. Beethoven and Einstein often seemed
absent-minded because they were preoccupied with MP during most of their waking hours.

Thus MP is nothing new; not only the great musicians and artists, but
practically any specialist today, such as athletes, trained soldiers,
businessmen, etc., must cultivate their own MP in order to compete successfully.
In fact every one of us does it all the time! When we get up in the morning and
quickly go over the planned activities of the day, we are conducting MP, and the
complexity of that MP probably exceeds that of a Chopin Mazurka. Yet we do it in
an instant, without even thinking about it as MP, because we have been
practicing it since early childhood. Can you imagine what disasters would happen
if we never had a mental plan for the day? But that is basically what we do if
we walk onto a stage and play a recital without MP training. No wonder
performers get so nervous! As we shall see, MP is perhaps the single best
antidote against stage fright – it certainly worked for Mozart.
